---
layout: lesson
root: ../..
title: Conversational Git
level: intermediate
---

When you travel to a country
where you don't speak the native language,
frequently there is no time,
to properly learn it.
If you are to accomplish anything on your own,
you need to know
a few essential words and phrases.
The same is true for Git.
This lesson won't teach you to become a Git expert.
Instead, we want you to be able to
understand some of the vocabulary,
and communicate:
your desires to Git,
and your actions to others.

The first concept we introduce
is the [repository](../gloss.html#repository).
The repository contains a directory of files and folders
and their state going back to its creation.

We will start with a small repository
with only a few commits
that has been created for you to practice with.

We will fetch the `bio-pipeline` repository from GitHub user `ahmadia`
using the `clone` command.

The `clone` command makes a perfect copy of another repository.
By default, it creates a Git repository of the same name
in the same directory you entered the command.
The command (and its successful output)
should look similar to this:

```
$ git clone https://github.com/ahmadia/bio-pipeline.git
Cloning into 'bio-pipeline'...
remote: Counting objects: 41, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (36/36), done.
remote: Total 41 (delta 19), reused 23 (delta 4)
Unpacking objects: 100% (41/41), done.
Checking connectivity... done
```
You can now enter the repository
(which is also a directory on your file system)
by typing:

```
$ cd bio-pipeline
```

If we now type `ls`,
we see that the repository
has some code
and a few data files.

```
$ ls
2013-05-24-2760-2763.txt Lumi.2761.csv            Lumi.2763.csv
Lumi.2760.csv            Lumi.2762.csv            python_pipeline.ipy
```

If we add the `-a` flag to show everything,
we can see that Git has created a hidden directory called `.git`:

```
$ ls -a
.	..	.git
```

Git stores information about the project
in this special sub-directory.
If we ever delete it,
we will lose our local copy of the project's history,
and any changes or commits
we had not published yet.

We are looking
at the latest snapshot, or *commit*,
of the `bio-pipeline` repository.
If we want to see the name of this commit,
we use the `git log` command.
By default, `git log` gives us
information about this commit
and every other commit
made before it.
We use the option `-n 1`
to inform Git that we only want to see the current one.

```
$ git log -n 1
commit 61fd2bcece2126cdd8ee24f40a04c18d39403022
Author: Aron Ahmadia <aron@ahmadia.net>
Date:   Tue Jun 4 10:59:21 2013 -0400

    Made fixes to Python pipeline
```

The output of the command
provides a summary of the commit
Aron Ahmadia made on June 4, 2013.
The line: `Made fixes to Python pipeline`
is Aron's *commit message*.

The alphabet soup of digits and letters
starting with `61fd2` is called a *hash*.
The hash uniquely identifies the commit,
and was automatically generated by Git
as the final step of the commit creation process.

We can think of the hash as a label
permanently affixed to this exact version of the code and data.

Usually, we are interested in
how a commit differs from its *parent*.
The commit's parent is the previous version of the code and data,
and usually immediately precedes it in history.

We can see how the commit changed from its parent
by adding the `-p` flag (for "patch"), to `git log -n 1`.
After you enter this command,
you will see the changes in this commit
presented in *diff* format.
Since the output does not fit in the screen,
Git will pipe the output into a pager (by default, less).
You can scroll up and down
through the log
by using the up and down arrow keys.
When you are done,
just press `q`.

```
$ git log -n 1 -p
commit 61fd2bcece2126cdd8ee24f40a04c18d39403022
Author: Aron Ahmadia <aron@ahmadia.net>
Date:   Tue Jun 4 10:59:21 2013 -0400

    Made fixes to Python pipeline

diff --git a/python_pipeline.ipy b/python_pipeline.ipy
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..ab9e62b
--- /dev/null
+++ b/python_pipeline.ipy
@@ -0,0 +1,44 @@
+%pylab
+import numpy as np
+
+f = open('Lumi.2760.csv')
+g = f.readlines()
+f.close()
...
```

The output is cryptic
because it intended to be read by machines,
and sometimes humans.
The output, also known as the *diff*,
tells you how each file was changed
from its previous version to this one.

The diff headers in the output:

```
diff --git a/python_pipeline.ipy b/python_pipeline.ipy
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..ab9e62b
--- /dev/null
+++ b/python_pipeline.ipy
```

summarize the differences
between the previous version of the file
and its new version.

Since `python_pipeline.ipy` was a file new to the repository,
we see this special line:

```
--- /dev/null
```

This indicates that there was no previous file,
and this file is new.
The following line:

```
+++ b/python_pipeline.ipy
```

Tells you that the new file was named `python_pipeline.ipy`.

The numbers between the `@@` markers tell you which lines were changed,

```
@@ -0,0 +1,44 @@
```

In this case,
Aron created a new file
and populated lines 1-44.

The lines following,
preceded by a `+`,
are the contents of the new file he added,
`python_pipeline.ipy`.

