---
layout: lesson
root: ..
title: To Do
---

This summary needs to be framed as the main learnings from the lesson
as they apply to instructing at a bootcamp. In other words, the
summaries are the thing they can flick back to weeks after completing
the training course, as they are preparing to teach for the first (or
second or third) time.

For instance, the summary of the first lesson (01-intro.md) might be:

*   Learning consists of more than "just" conveying facts and
    techniques: it's just as important to create linkages between
    concepts.

    *   Example: our introduction to the Unix shell seems light on
        facts (it only introduces 15 commands in two and a half
        hours), because the main goal is to help learners construct
        the mental model and notional machine that these commands fit
        into.

*   People learn best when they care about the topic and believe they
    can master it, so we teach the things that are quick to master and
    immediately useful first

    *   Example: the Python lessons start with reading data with numpy
        and plotting with matplotlib, not print hello world and a
        lecture on the fundamental data types associated with Python
        programming

*   Programming is a skill that will improve with practice, not an
    intrinsic talent that you either have or don't have

    *   We code live in front of our learners instead of using slides,
        so that they can see us make mistakes (i.e. we demonstrate
        that we aren't innately talented)

    *   We get them to attend in groups

The other great thing about these summaries is that they give the
instructor ammunition to defend the teaching materials.  In my
experience defense is required against attacks from within (e.g., a
new instructor suddenly decides two-days out from the bootcamp that
they don't like that we jump into numpy and matplotlib right away and
starts wasting precious time re-factoring the lessons) and externally
(e.g., a helper comes up to an instructor during a coffee break and
suggests a change to the materials for the next session). In both
cases, they need a clear and concise rationale for why the materials
and bootcamp structure (e.g. live coding, sticky notes) are the way
they are.

The main method for breaking up the content during the skype call is
via polling the audience. You could scatter some polls throughout the
teaching notes, a bit like challenges are scattered throughout the
novice materials (e.g. the question about the difference between
phonic and whole language approaches to teaching kids to read was a
nice poll that could be added to the notes).

You often get asked during the skype call for references to back up
what you're saying. Those will definitely need to be in the notes, as
new instructors won't be as familiar with educational literature.
